You're watching and listening to the
electronic interfer live stream and I'm
Ali Abuner. And since the US and Israel
launched the war on Iran on February
28th, the Iranian people have endured a
devastating assault that is striking far
beyond military targets. Cities are
being bombed, schools and hospitals
damaged, and more than a thousand
civilians, including many children, have
been killed. Ancient treasures from the
Golthan Palace to historic uh quarters
in Isfahan have been damaged. Oil depot
strikes have filled to her own skies
with tech toxic smoke, threatening
public health and the environment. Iran
is of course hitting back against Israel
and US bases and interests across the
region. As this war goes on, I want to
step back and look at the question of
how to achieve security from two major
perspectives.
One is the perspective of the Gulf
states that and other Arab regimes that
allied with the US and Israel and on the
other hand is Iran. And to do this,
first I want to look at a few segments
from a conversation that was recorded in
July of 2024 at the Aspen Security Forum
between Washington Post columnist David
Ignasius and she nasal bin al- Khalifa.
He is the son of the king of Bahrain as
well as the country's national security
adviser and commander of the royal
guard. Of course, Bahrain is one of the
Gulf states allied with the United
States and Israel, and it it was uh or
still is at least on paper a major US
military base, the headquarters of the
fifth fleet. And for context, this
conversation was recorded about 8 months
into the genocide in Gaza and a few
months after Iran carried out its first
true promise operation, retaliating for
Israel's bombing of Iran's diplomatic
mission in Syria. So this first clip is
Al Khalifa answering a question about
why Bahrain signed up to the Abraham
Accords. That's the Trump sponsored
agreements uh between various Arab
states and Israel.
Um we are from the optimist camp and
when we went for the Abraham Accord um
we we we didn't have a laundry list um
and we didn't have any um list that we
wanted to achieve first of all and then
we will sign the Abraham Accords. Um
signing the Abraham Accords was
basically one of the most important
milestones that we have achieved. um we
have opened a channel with the uh
Israelis and the officials and the
Israeli government and I see this is why
we should continue and this is why we
should always keep an open door and the
channel with the Israelis.
>> So that's uh Al Khalifa talking about
the relationship with the Israelis. Now
let's hear a clip of him answering a
question about Bahin's relationship with
Iran and the possibility of diplomacy
with Iran. Remember this is in mid 2024.
>> Well, we we are strong believers in two
paths, deterrence and diplomacy as well.
Um and in the art of diplomacy, we
should always keep an open door. Um I
know we have cut relations with Iran. We
have zero contact with Iran. Um and I
think talking to Iran like what we have
done in the during the Abraham Accords
talking to Israel is always important
for us always important for the security
of the region. Um we should always keep
these channels open in order to um get a
proper structure uh for our security and
stability and harmony in the region. So,
>> so
he he does go on to say that Bahin has
been talking to Iran. But the words that
really stand out there are we have we
cut relations with Iran. We have zero
contact with the Iranians. And this is
at the same time that Bahrain and other
Gulf regimes were launching into this
love affair with Israel and deepening
the love affair in the midst of a
genocide. And if you recall last week,
we spoke about how Iran has never at any
time attacked any of its Arab neighbors.
So you have to keep that in mind when
you hear about this zero contact policy
and cutting off relations with Iran. Now
the next clip is Al Khalifa describing a
security agreement between Bahrain and
the United States called the
comprehensive security integration and
prosperity agreement signed in 2023
also known as CIPA. So let's listen to
him talking about what is the essence of
that agreement.
CIPA um it is one of the most important
uh achievements we have achieved for the
Kingdom of Bahrain and the United
States. Why? Because it's not just uh
military defenseorientated.
It is a comprehensive security
integration and also it has the
prosperity agreement element in it. Uh
if you allow me with my great memory I I
had my notes with me. I would like to
point three
articles in that agreement which are the
most important things and believe me we
have fought hard for those articles
until we got them right. So article two
which is the most important thing is
defense and security cooperation.
Article three is the economic commercial
and trade cooperation. Article four is
science technology and network security.
Let me read out a paragraph from article
2 and then we'll talk about it. I'm
quoting CEPA right now. Any external
aggression or threat of external
aggression against the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity
of any of the parties shall be a matter
of grave concern to the other parties.
In the event of external aggression or
threat of external aggression against
one party, the parties shall in
accordance with their respective
constitutions and laws immediately meet
at the most senior levels to determine
additional defense needs and to develop
and implement appropriate defense and
deterrent responses as decided upon the
parties including in the economic,
military and or political realms. The
parties stand ready to immediately share
available and appropriate information
and intelligence in response to such an
event.
So you can see he's very proud of this
security agreement with the United
States where if Bahrain is attacked uh
the United States is going to rush to
Bahrain's assistance or at least to have
meetings about rushing to Bahrain's
assistance and if the United States is
attacked Bahrain which is roughly the
size of O'Hare airport in Chicago is
going to come to the defense of the
United States.
Um and Al Khalifa goes on to say that
Bahin was working to expand the same
model across the region. So let's hear
that clip now too.
Well um we are right now working on the
expansion of this agreement. Um and also
letting other countries join the U
agreement. It started as a bilateral
agreement but it is eventually going to
become a multilateral agreement. um um
and looking at a wider scope. It's not
just the Middle East. Um so we are
looking at showing that the United
States has a lot of friends around the
world and this agreement should bring
the true friends all together. Now
what's important about it is I believe
that this is the furthest the United
States went in in in security guarantees
to an Arab state. So this is why I
hardly suggest that we should go
forward. It is short of article 5 um but
has all the guarantees.
So you can see there when uh Al Khalifa
refers to article five he's talking
about article five of the NATO treaty
which very famously obligates uh all
NATO members to come to the assistance
of any other NATO member that's
attacked. So this mutual defense
guarantee. So he's saying it's almost
that it's it's almost as strong as that
and he's very proud of it. Well, what
does this mean in practice for Bahrain
and not just Bahrain but other Arab
regimes that are in a similar situation?
We're focusing on Bahrain here because
we have this interview. But you can
apply the same logic to Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Qatar, Jordan, and other
countries that are in this bar in this
same basket. And so I'm going to skip
back to an earlier part of the interview
because that's where we see what all
this actually amounts to in terms of
what Bahrain and the other Arab regimes
are offering to the United States. This
clip is about it's a bit longer. It's
about 3 minutes, but I think it's very
revealing.
an important uh day in the Middle East
that I don't think gets enough
recognition
uh is uh April 13-4
when Iran launched
an attack on Israel of turned out to be
100 ballistic missiles, probably 250
drones. Um and it was essentially
completely stopped by integrated air
defense and extraordinary
um uh performance by a number of air
forces obviously led by by Israel.
What's not widely understood uh is that
Sentcom uh starting several years ago
organized integrated air defense and
radars including countries in the Arab
world such as Bahrain. So that night of
April 13 was an important one for
Bahrain. And I'd like and I sure our
audience would be interested in hearing
what that was like for you, what you
knew about the Iranian threat as those
missiles and drones were launched and
whether you think this air defense
integration might be the beginning of
some broader regional defense
cooperation.
>> Um well, deterrence is our key word,
right? um in in all aspects when we
speak about our re uh region and its
conflicts um and especially when we um
pinpoint Iran uh being within the mix um
don't forget Iran is only 200 miles away
from the Kingdom of Bahrain. Uh we host
the fifth fleet uh command over there
with multinational uh commands as well.
So we play a vital role um in the
deterrence and also the stability of the
region. Uh we are proud of it. Um it's
been running on now for more than 75
years. Uh which is uh a great
achievement for the kingdom of Bahrain.
It wasn't only for the kingdom of
Bahrain but also for the region. So um I
refer to my grandfather when he he he um
described the fifth fleet as the
mountain of fire that is protecting us
from all threats. Um well that night in
specific you know we we we were all in
duty and uh we are always in close
contact with our uh colleagues and
allies and um the region itself. Um
thank god we have a proper integrated
system um especially trying to cover um
our uh airspace. So this is excellent uh
example for how we should come come
closer, how we should always integrate
our efforts and always layer the uh the
map and make sure that we don't let uh
lose any um uh I mean we should airtight
the region in specific um but there's so
much details to go into that uh specific
attack. Um we know um many countries
have been um in charge of the deterrence
itself and we are proud as the Kingdom
of Bahrain to be part of that integrated
system. So I I just note the importance
of of that. Um on that night uh many
countries as uh his highness just said
including Bahrain certainly including
Jordan were part of the defense that um
prevented the war. If if those missiles
had landed and hit their targets um we
would have been in a very different
situation.
So that's uh Nasar al- Khalifa, the son
of the king of Bahrain, talking to
Washington Post columnist David Ignatius
in July 2024 at the Aspen Security
Forum. And what you can see there is
what the what Israel and the United
States got out of Bahrain's total
subservience. And of course that applies
to the other states in the region. Uh
what did but what did Bahrain and the
other Gulf states get? Uh you heard the
prince there saying that he considered
the American fifth fleet to be the
mountain of fire that would defend
Bahrain against the supposed threat from
Iran. Well, where is the fifth fleet
now? It's not in Bahrain. It's not even
in the Persian Gulf. I'm sure that John
Elma will be talking about that in a
little while.
So, did they get the security they were
promised? Did they get this almost
NATOike guarantee? I would argue that
they got the opposite. And it's very
clear from what's going on that it is
precisely their alliance with the United
States and Israel that made them into
targets. It was their hostility and zero
contact policy with Iran that led them
to host US bases that were used to
attack Iran and that made them into
targets. So this is a failed model of
security. Whether they will wake up to
that remains to be seen.
Iran also appears to be re re-evaluating
its own security model and that's what I
want to look at next. Um I want to look
at this uh briefing from uh March 11th.
So that's yesterday as we're speaking uh
given by Ibrahim Sulfari the
spokesperson for Iran's Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps which of
course is one of the major branches of
Iran's uh military.
It's in Farsy which I don't speak but I
was able to listen to the Arabic
interpretation provided by Al Jazzer and
I'm going to just summarize some of the
key points that Sulfari makes.
I think we can play the video just so
you can see what it looks like.
So just summarizing the main points that
I wrote down uh from what Zulfakari
says. He says due to their successive
defeats, the American and Israeli
enemies are suffering a collapse in
their morale and experiencing delirium.
To Trump and the Zionist child killers
and Mossad, we warned you repeatedly,
you can start this war, but we, the
armed forces of Iran, will be the ones
who decide when it ends. Because Iran
holds the initiative in the Strait of
Hormuz, we do not need to close the
Strait of Hormuz. The closure is due to
what the Americans and Zionists have
done to the states of the region. We
emphasize that we will not permit one
liter of oil to pass through the strait
for the US. the Zionists and their
accompl accompllices. Any ship working
for them that tries to pass will be a
legitimate target for us.
Your strategy of hiding behind the
states of the region and other states in
West Asia is over. Hiding in civilian
places and behind infrastructure will
not shield your cowardly army from the
trap you have placed yourselves in. Your
bases and places will be targeted one
after the other. The fire you started
will burn you. The period of tit for
tatat strikes and successive strikes is
over. We have entered a period of
continuous strikes until you are
punished and regret what you have done.
For once, be honest and don't hide
behind bravado. Admit that you are
defeated. Admit your error. You have
threatened to send your navies to this
region. You tried getting close once,
but our rockets forced you to flee.
We were waiting for this from the first
day of the war so we could show you that
your cowardly army is much weaker than
you thought. You will not be able to use
artificial measures to bring down oil
prices. From the start of the war, we
told you to get ready for $200 a barrel
oil. You are the cause of the insecurity
in the region. The armed forces of the
Islamic Republic will not permit your
forces to move in this area and we will
strike with full force. We will avenge
the pure blood of Alida, women,
children, and the innocence of Minab.
So that's the speech from Zulfakari
yesterday.
And the elements you see there, he says
that the the period of tit for tatat is
over. Iran is now going to strike until
it's mets
goals. And we see this message
reinforced today in the first speech
from the new supreme leader of Iran
Ayatah Mushtame who is of course the son
of the leader who was murdered by uh
Israel and the United States in the
opening attacks of this war.
and uh there were brief uh or summaries
published in the media but while we've
been on air the tessim news agency
published the entire text in far so what
I'm reading is um a or what I'm quoting
is a a machine translation but it it's
pretty good and obviously the speech is
long so I'm only going to point to a few
excerpts that are relevant to this
analysis but a few other things I
thought were interesting as well. So
one thing that's quite remarkable is he
says that
he says that uh
I must briefly state my situation and
position regarding the vote of the
esteemed assembly of experts. I your
servant say Mushtab Hussein
learned about the result of the vote of
the esteemed assembly of experts the at
the same time as you and through the
Islamic Republic's television. So what
he's saying there is he didn't seek this
position. He didn't even know he was uh
being nominated. The speech is uh quite
long and interesting and directed at
various audiences internal and external.
Um but the part that has so far been
widely quoted and is relevant here
addresses the Iran's strategy in terms
of the war. And he says here in the part
addressing the armed forces of Iran, he
says, "Dear brother warriors, the demand
of the masses of the people is to
continue the effective defense."
And he says, "The lever of blocking the
straight of Hormuz must definitely
continue to be used." He also addresses
Iran's allies. He says, "I also
sincerely thank the warriors of the
resistance front. We consider the
countries of the resistance front to be
our best friends and the cause of
resistance and the resistance front are
an inseparable part of the values of the
Islamic revolution. Undoubtedly, the
solidarity of the components of this
front will shorten the path to
liberation from the Zionist sedition. As
we have seen, the brave and faithful
Yemen did not stop defending the
oppressed people of Gaza. and the
devoted Hezbollah has come to the aid of
the Islamic Republic of Iran despite all
obstacles and the Iraqi resistance has
also courageously taken the same line.
So he is reaffirming Iran's commitment
to resistance and to Palestine and I
think that's an important uh message uh
and and signal as to the direction that
Iran and its leadership are going to
continue to go.
Um
he uh addresses Iran's neighbors which
includes Bahrain and the other countries
that we were just talking about. He
says, "We have 15 neighboring countries
by land or sea and have always been and
are willing to have warm and
constructive relations with all of them,
but the enemy has been gradually
establishing military and financial
bases in some of these countries for
years to secure its dominance over the
region. In the recent attack, some
military bases were used and naturally,
as we had explicitly warned, we simply
attacked those bases without attacking
those countries. From now on, we will
inevitably continue to do so. Although
we still believe in the need for
friendship between ourselves and those
neighbors, these countries must make
their duty clear to the aggressors of
our beloved homeland and the murderers
of our people. I recommend that they
close those bases as soon as possible
because they must have realized by now
that the claim of establishing security
and peace by America was nothing more
than a lie. So
you can see there the diametrically
opposed visions of security that uh you
have on the one hand the Gulf, Bahraini,
Saudi, Kuwaiti, Qatari etc. view that
inviting the US and Israel in makes you
safe and Iran saying inviting Israel
and the United States in puts you in
danger and stands in the way of the
friendly relations we want to have with
you. So
both visions are now being tested.
Which one prevails will determine the
future of the region for generations to
come. And that is now being tested
through force. Uh which side will be
able to impose its will through war is
essentially what we are seeing now. And
undoubtedly
that is something that
was forced by the US and Israel but many
people across the region are paying the
price. So just I want to now just go to
uh what happened at the UN security
council last night. Now one person who
seemed to understand the situation
extremely well is Russian foreign
minister Sergey Lavrov. might have seen
this clip uh from a few days ago of him
responding to a delegation of Arab
ambassadors in Moscow urging Russia to
tell Iran to stop what they called
unprovoked attacks on those Arab
countries. And Lavro's response was very
uh skillful.
And I'll just read a couple of excerpts
of what he told them. He said the Arab
group on beha on whose behalf you are
speaking did indeed warn against
escalation. Many of the Arab monarchies
publicly said that things should not be
taken toward a military solution and
that they would not allow their airspace
to be used. But when it all began,
contrary to your repeated appeals to the
United States and Israel, did you
condemn what the United States and
Israel started to do? Did you condemn
the deaths of 170 girls in a school? We
do not want the Gulf countries on whose
behalf you speak to suffer. We believe
that what is happening does not give our
Arab colleagues any military advantage.
But we also cannot accept the logic
according to which Iran's actions are
unacceptable while everything the United
States and Israel do is not even subject
to discussion. Do you understand what I
mean? Then he says, "A country,"
referring to Iran that is in the middle
of negotiations is subjected to
treacherous aggression and yet it agreed
to continue the negotiations. And
finally, he says, "Simply saying that
Iran has no right to do anything means
that you are effectively encouraging the
United States and Israel to continue.
This is illogical." He says a lot more
but those are the uh parts I pulled out
that that eliminate that that illuminate
uh I think the key points. So it was
extremely disappointing
that yesterday in the UN Security
Council, Russia and China abstained on a
completely one-sided resolution
sponsored by Bahrain and other Arab
states and backed by the United States
which strongly condemns Iran while
remaining totally silent about the
ongoing USIsraeli attack on Iran. Russia
and China allowed this resolution to
pass just like they allowed Trump's
so-called board of peace resolution to
pass in November. And I want to share
two reactions that I think sum things up
correctly. The first is professor Balak
Krishnan Raja Gopal and he is the United
Nations special reporter on the right to
adequate housing and he says
another security council resolution
which undermines peace and security
condemning Iran exercising its right to
self-defense while saying nothing about
the illegal act of aggression against
Iran by the US and Israel. I condemn it
as illegal and unprincipled.
And I also want to share the reaction of
human rights lawyer Craig Muhibar who we
have regularly hosted on this program.
And he writes,
"For the second time in four months, the
UN Security Council has today bowed to
the US Empire and its vassels and
ignored international law on its behalf.
and neither Russia nor China have acted
to stop it through their veto rights. In
the middle of the unlawful and bloody
USIsrael access aggression on Iran, the
council is entirely silent on the
aggression and on Iran's charterbased
right to defend itself. Instead of
condemning the aggressors, it condemns
only Iran for attacks on the territory
of countries in the region hosting US
military bases, some of which have been
directly complicit in the aggression,
proving once again how oil and money are
valued more than sovereignty, human
lives, lives, or international law. The
resolution gained a record number of
sponsors. The council has allowed
genocide and serial aggression to
continue for more than two years in the
region without action
and has decided that oil prices are a
step too far. I have to say I share
those uh sentiments and I find it
baffling that Russia and China would
veto this. They would have lost nothing
by vetoing it. They could have vetoed it
and said, "Now, let's talk about a real
resolution." And I've also heard people
saying, "Oh, well, these resolutions
don't really matter because they get
ignored." And that's true. We saw
multiple resolutions ordering Israel to
stop its massacres in Gaza being ignored
with no consequences. But that doesn't
make them inconsequential because they
legitimize uh a completely illegitimate
situation. And if Russia and China don't
think they're consequential, why do they
show up at the Security Council and
debate and vote? If they don't think the
UN is important, they they should leave
it. But as long as they are there, they
need to fulfill their responsibility.
Not just looking after their own
national interests, but looking after
broader interests, which is their
responsibility as permanent members of
the security council. So this was deeply
deeply disappointing.
>> Thank you so much Ally for that
broadspectctrum analysis. Um, I mean,
you know, I I just keep thinking like I
I wish uh our our corporate mainstream
uh would do a fraction of the kind of,
you know, connecting the dots and
pointing out um why and how Bahrain, for
example,
um made the deal with, you know, the the
imperial corps um and
full well knowing that it wasn't going
to get anything out of it except thrown
under the bus. Um, and I mean it's it's
it's remarkable
um how everything seems to be falling
apart for the US uh politically in the
Gulf. And um who knows
>> what what but you know there there's no
limits. They have no limits and no red
lines in terms of how far they're
willing to go. absolutely maintain their
hegemony to maintain their empire and
the brutality and ruthlessness that we
saw in that we saw in Gaza through two
and a half years of genocide is their
model.
>> And they're now doing that gleefully in
Lebanon, in uh in Iran. I mean, bombing
apartment buildings in Iran, bombing the
school in Iran, uh bombing the oil tank,
I mean hospitals, you know, dozens of
hospitals already. We we spoke about
that already last week. So
no outcome is is guaranteed. And what
what is Iran saying? You know, Iran has
been so demonized. But all they have
said and all they have been saying all
along is we just want to live in peace.
We want good relations with our
neighbors. And then you know that that
map that we always see that meme of uh
look how close Iran put itself to its US
bases. Well, where are the bases? Iraq,
Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Saudi
Arabia, Jordan, um
>> I thought I named Qatar. Pakistan
essentially because you know Pakistan
has been a CIA base of operations in the
region for decades. So Iran is literally
surrounded by host countries that are if
not directly hostile
uh host to a country the United States
that has been seeking to destroy Iran
for almost five decades. Yeah. And if
people can't see that, then they're just
too um influenced by either sectarian
propaganda or other forms of propaganda
that uh you know that just defy logic.
And this is important. It's not just
about Iran. I mean Iran deserves peace
and security like everyone else. Its
people do. But nobody else in the region
can have peace and security either.
No one. And and this is what's at stake
is whether people will be allowed
self-determination and liberation and
the right to live in their own lands
safely without the US and Israel
murdering them at will
>> or sanctioning them for decades.